So to get these tolerances on the concrete, they were just charging the moon, because if a man is responsible, they have to prepare for the worst.
Well, there was a clever man on one of the bidders who said, heck with the tolerances.
I'm just going to lay these things out together out in the field here.
put one piece in, then the next piece in, it's going to fit, and he laid the whole thing out in the field.
He came in way under, bit everybody else, and saved us a lot of money.
Then he just picked them up out of the field and put them in the building.
And it worked.
Oh, sure.
I mean, if they fit together out in the field, they're going to fit together in the building.
So we saved quite a bit of money there.
Now, another place we saved a lot of money, the Welch Foundation,
gave us a million dollars, and it went in the bank.
Well, it took us four years to build this thing.
So we were accumulating money, and the Welsh Foundation money was set aside for research equipment.
And so we had more money for research equipment than we knew what to do with.
We kept buying another magnet, and some more money would show up, and we'd buy another source, and well, we didn't have any problem with money.
Also, the AEC, which supported us,
in operations after it was built always gave us plenty of money because the state of Texas gave us several hundred million every year.
And the AEC said, well, every time we put a million dollars in or a dollar into the Texas A&M, we get $2 million in research.
So that was extremely important that the state of Texas continued to provide operation funds.
And that money came through the coordinating board, or what?
The state money?
Or was it just a line item to the end?
I think it was a line item.
I suppose Texas got it for their Van de Graaff, too.
I don't know.
What other institutions in the United States, at the time our facility was finished, what other colleges or universities had similar facilities, similar cyclotrons?
Well,
It was the biggest one around at the time.
And the ironical thing is that ten years later when they, you know, they have to shut things down, Texas got shut down, Rice got shut down, because they were earlier than we were and we're still going, even though at the beginning we didn't have anything and they had everything.
So, they're out of nuclear physics.
Because their machine was outdated?
Yeah, they get obsolete.
I mean, the new machines come out.
Okay.
But, let's use the word competitive.
We were competing with what other universities?
Well, those, Princeton had a small cyclotron, but you see, that's the reason they wanted to get that three million dollars.
Maryland had a small cyclotron.
So essentially those 23 universities, Notre Dame, Indiana, Purdue, I don't remember them all, all had, they were all nuclear physics.
They could write proposals.
Minnesota, I think, Michigan.
The fact that they could write proposals meant they had nuclear physicists doing research.
But what's happening is their machines are becoming obsolete, and they were knocked out of business when this great big cyclotron came along that we got.
And the research funding came generally from whom?
Well, the Atomic Energy Commission and the state of Texas.
None from any private corporations?
I don't believe so.
Okay.
So, has that been true down through the years?
Has the AEC been the primary?
Well, it's National Science Foundation now, I think.
I left the cyclotron in 1970, so.
After that, I'm kind of out of touch.
All right, and so it begins in 67, and some graduate students start recruiting some graduate students.
Yeah.
Well, then the next big milestone is that Rudder died.
You probably know the year that happens.
It's the spring of 1970.
Okay.
Well, within four months, I was fired.
Andy Suttle was putting, well, he was always the director.
But none of the other research people would take my position.
So he had to put the chief engineer in charge.
And what reason were you given for this?
I was incompetent.
And who made that decision?
Subtle?
Yeah.
I asked him to, well, that's some of the documentation I was telling you about.
I don't know whether you want any of that or not.
I have his letter and my response.
All right, let me turn it off.
Well, I don't like to watch any women in public, but I've got a letter from Martell and Plas saying, you know, how they were against it.
I've got a letter from Berkeley saying this is ridiculous.
When did Gil Plas come as the new department head?
Well, that's when all the people were leaving.
Late 60s?
late 60s, because he was there at the time.
See, when I go left, and then Squire, he was in a continual fight with Subtle, which saved me, because I was, they were shooting at, I was in the trench and they were shooting at each other.
And Squire left before Subtle, I believe.
Then Gammill, he got disgusted with all the fighting, so he left.
Now, he was a faculty member.
Yeah, he was a very good theoretical physicist from Los Alamos.
And Potter left because they just pushed him down.
And Eisner left.
Describe Dr. Plass as the department head.
Well, that's interesting because I was more or less responsible for getting him here.
He and I ate at the same rooming house.
boarding house in Princeton.
He was a graduate student at Princeton when I was there.
And Madeline was there, too.
We all knew each other.
So, well, what brought it to a head was when Zener became the new dean.
And when everybody was out of town in August, he appointed Squire, head of the department.
And the first thing we got from Squire was a memo that we had to be at work at 8 o'clock in the morning.
I wish I'd saved that memo.
I just threw it in the wastebasket.
But everybody marched into Rudder's office and said, this is impossible.
And Rudder, I remember asking Zener, did you do that?
And he said, yes, I did.
Zener was an honest guy.
But from then on, essentially the department was run
I don't think Rudder got involved.
That closed probably Hall.
We went to Halls once a month or something.
And essentially they just ignored Squire.
And Zener was still, people liked Zener.
He was a decent guy.
He just didn't have much sense when he put Squire in there without asking anybody.
Well, anyway, that accounts for six of the people with full professorships who left.
So, we needed a new department head, and that's when I thought of Gil Klotz.
He was at the University of Texas in Dallas, and he was a very good physicist.
His specialty.
When he was in atmospheric physics, he was one of the first who recognized carbon dioxide could be a problem, the greenhouse effect.
He did his research at, or after he left Princeton, he was at Johns Hopkins and wrote some papers about the greenhouse effect back there.
So he was in atmospheric physics and very well thought, well I knew him, he was a smart guy.
In fact,
He had the misfortune when he was a graduate student at Princeton with me to follow Richard Feynman.
I don't know if you've heard of Feynman or not.
Well, he's considered one of the five greatest physicists in our generation.
He was Wheeler's first graduate student, and Gil Plas was the second graduate student.
And they were working on some, his research was picking up, expanding on what Feynman had done.
Well anyway, so I knew a lot about him, and I knew what he did, and I knew him personally, he was a very decent guy.
So we were delighted when he came.
and he brought chaos into
Well, before he came, we never had an appointments or promotions committee.
The department had, you know, he's the head.
I mean, the head of the head.
It was, you know, it's the Army, and you don't have a committee.
I guess even in the Army you have committees.
So anyhow, PLOS started to make our department more like departments that weren't Army bases like they are here.
And, well, he just kind of made the transition to the new world.
Mr. Rudder dies, and within a few months, Jack Williams is the new president.
Thank goodness, yeah, because Ludicke was behind this business.
And from what I've heard, it was a four to three vote that Williams won over Ludicke.
in the board of directors.
That's what I've heard.
I have no independent information.
And so that knocked, I mean, subtle left within a couple of weeks after that.
His mentor was gone.
And then they appointed Sugihara, who was a chemistry professor to be head of the cyclotron.
And we were all happy with that.
I mean, every cyclotron or Van de Graaff in the country is run by academic people.
This was the only one that was run by a vice president of research who had no sympathy for the academic people and wasn't an academic person himself at all.
Now, on paper, the budget for the cyclotron was administered by the dean or the vice president early on?
Well, it went through Subtle.
Subtle interacted with the Atomic Energy Commission.
The Atomic Energy Commission would send some people down once a year when we presented the budget, and we always met for dinner and then went to Subtle's apartment and talked about, you know, just personal relationships.
And I went to Washington with Subtle a couple of times.
So he represented the university on the cyclotron.
Looking back on those first years, are there any other people that you now think of deserve a pat on the back that hasn't been mentioned?
Well, I mentioned, I mentioned Squire and I mentioned Hall and Potter and Plus, they were the important people.
there weren't any former students of A&M, there weren't any board members that were key?
No, let me tell you one thing about the board.
When we had to get started, we needed some kind of an estimate of how much money we were going to spend for the cyclotron and how much for the building and how much for the shielding.
So we hired a company in Berkeley, where they knew how to build cyclotrons, and they
made an estimate of, for $50,000, they wrote up a little proposal of what's involved in building the cyclotron.
So then when the time came to build the cyclotron, we went out for bids, and these people said, well, you can't go out for bids.
You know, we're involved now.
We're the ones who should build this cyclotron.
Well, they thought the board was a bunch of hayseeds who didn't know anything.
They didn't know they ran oil companies and things like that.
And so somebody on the board said, who paid for that proposal?
Well, I guess you did.
Well, whose proposal is that?
Well, it is Texas A&M's proposal.
Then what have you got to say about what we do from now on?
And they wouldn't even let them bid.
So the board, well, I got the impression it was a pretty confident board.
They had some really good people, I guess.
Who was the man from, he was vice president of some, it wasn't Bechtel, it was some other, anyhow, Evans was clearly a very good guy.
And the other man, it wasn't Boydell, was it?
Boydell was from Dow Chemical.
Okay.
Well, he, you know, he... A.P.
Boydell.
B-E-T-E-M.
The vice president or something.
I mean, for these little company from Berkeley to tell this guy how he should run his business didn't go over very well.
No, they had some... And Squire, when he...
recruited me.
He made a point of the qualifications of the board.
Yeah.
Then Williams comes in.
Did you all have any direct interrelations with him?
No, things got to be more like an academic place.
And they got the new head of the cyclotron.
He was a member of the chemistry department.
So the cyclotron was now in the College of Science.
It wasn't off there all by itself.
And... On paper, it reported to the dean?
Yeah.
I think, yeah, that's right.
They... Yeah, I think the director of the cyclotron probably reported to the dean, just like the heads of the departments reported to the dean.
But as I said, I wasn't involved then, so I... Now, did you continue to do research at the cyclotron?
No, I decided in about 1970,
And the Korean War was winding down.
Boeing in Seattle had fired 30,000 engineers, or 30,000 people, and suddenly the jobs just weren't there.
If you look at our department now, I guess half the department's between 60 and 65.
They were the ones who I had a lot to do with hiring them.
Well, for those guys, there was plenty of jobs, because we were hiring, and so were a lot of other people.
Well, that hiring ended about 1970, and so I decided that since I had tenure, now that they did have tenure, that I don't know whether Williams or Rudder had agreed to the AAUP standards.
I think it's Rudder.
Yeah.
For the first time, I decided tenure was a good thing.
Up until then, it really didn't make much difference.
So I thought, well, I'll get into nuclear medicine.
I mean, people are going to die forever.
It's always going to be business for people in nuclear medicine.
So I moved back to the physics department and had space in the physics department.
And with POS being the head of the department, it was convenient for me to do that.
And so I began to have graduate students in the physics department.
All right, as that new routine for you begins, describe a typical work day.
What time did you get there?
What happened when?
Oh, well, probably my teaching, but that point was teaching engineers or pre-meds.
Those are our two big, two big clientels.
I think there's ten professors teaching engineers right now, because all the engineers have to take physics.
So I was teaching elementary physics, and I enjoy that if I've got to
prepare a lecture, I might as well have 100 people listening instead of 10.
These would be what classification?
Junior, seniors?
No, these would be freshmen.
This is their first introduction to physics.
And we found out that the people who had not had high school physics did better than the ones who had.
Part of that may be what they call the sophomore slump at Yale.
They had students coming from the public schools and students coming from the private schools, and they had about 50-50.
In the first year, the kids from the private schools had a great time.
It wasn't all that difficult.
They'd seen it all before.
The public school kids were really scratching to keep up.
But then the sophomore year came along and they had what they called a sophomore slump.
That was when the private school kids realized they didn't know everything anymore and they'd forgotten how to study.
Well, it was something like that here, I think.
They'd had some high school physics.
Which goes a ways, but it doesn't go nearly as far as our introductory physics.
And they'd wake up after about their second exam, which they'd flunked, but they had to start studying.
And so that's, I'm sure, cause that, I don't want to say the high school teachers aren't good, because I think they are.
But anyway.
So you'd get to the campus about what time?
So anyhow, well,
Oftentimes I'd have an 8 o'clock class on Monday, Wednesday, Friday, and the department was nice, they'd also give me a 10 o'clock class.
We had to teach at least two classes, and it would be the same introductory physics.
So I didn't have to work, well I always figured about 50 percent of my time was teaching.
You have to
grade papers.
And, well, I didn't give any homework.
I mean, it was up to them.
And then they took exams.
And fortunately, in physics, you can write exams that the computer can grade because there's answers.
And if you can't do the problem, well, they have a 20% chance of guessing the right answer.
But now in 1970, we didn't, we weren't yet doing them on the computer.
Well, the physics department was.
Oh, really?
See, we have people who know how to use computers.
Okay.
So we'd hire somebody.
But no, later on, the university did it, and that was much nicer.
Did you have, when you, the first class meeting, what were the guidelines that you laid out for those students?
What did you tell them to do or not to do?
Well, the first thing I'd tell them is that for an engineer, physics is like English is to a journalist.
I mean, you can't even do what you're interested in doing unless you know how to do physics.
And I found it was much more pleasant to teach engineers, who were not as smart, than to teach the pre-meds, who were very smart.
Because the pre-meds just wanted to get a grade, and the engineers, they were more relaxed.
If they got a B, it didn't affect their lives.
If a pre-med got a B, might not go to medical school, because they're so competitive that
if you get a bee anywhere, why, it could rule you out.
So that first thing was to encourage them that it was important.
And then I always use the, we have very good textbooks, I always use the textbooks as a set of notes, and I'd say don't take a lot of notes, it's all in the book, and then I'd give my own version and tell some stories and do some problems on the board.
but everything they needed to know was in the book, and then there was a whole lot of problems in the book, and they were assigned problems.
Did you check roll?
Did you tolerate their being absent as much as they wanted to?
Yeah, because, well, part of it, they were tested on the exam, and in the exam they'd get some problems, but they were never exactly the problems in the book, but they were similar.
If they didn't understand it, they couldn't do the test.
And I always had four versions of the test out there.
So they could work at it and cheat if they could.
And the Corps is the worst bunch of cheaters I ever saw.
In fact, when the women got here, for the first time in my experience, they'd come up and say, that guy over there was copying my paper.
The Corps would never do that.
And maybe that's good, if you're going to have an army, you've got to have guys who go down to the wire with each other.
You didn't have many women in classes in the 70s, did you?
No, you mentioned the woman who was here back in the 20s.
I remember when the women first came, and I remember one class, there were two women, and all the rest were men.
The two women were sitting next to each other, and there was an empty seat all the way around.
These men were scared to death of them because, or at least traditionally, if you were talking to the girls, everybody whistled.
And the girls, well, they raised the standards way up.
I mean,
The Corps of Cadets is not very friendly to academic work.
I knew one guy who quit the Corps because before the exam, they took him out at 4 o'clock in the morning and marched him.
And of course, he did terrible on the exam.
He worked very hard to get a good grade.
And so he said, to heck with his Corps, I want to learn, I want to be an engineer.
So because of things like that, the grades before the girls came were not too good.
and you know better than I do probably, my recollection is that the girls' dorms were always, all of them, above any of the boys' dorms or something like that, or any of the core dorms.
Did you grade on the curve, or did you have a certain, if you make a certain grade, you get a, you get that grade?
Well, yeah, you had to, if they, yeah, they know that if you get a 90, you should get an A if you get, but then,
The trick is to write exams so that not many people get above 90s and not many get above 80s.
So at the end, then you're very liberal and you give everybody above 86 and 8.
And then everybody's happy, except during the whole semester, they're unhappy.
And when they write their evaluation of the faculty member, you probably take a beating, I don't know.
What are some of the marvelous excuses you remember students offering for some problem they had or their absence?
Do you remember any creative, made-up excuses some student had?
Well, since they weren't required to come,
But for the reason they missed the test, or why they ought to get makeup?
Well, some of them would come puffing in halfway through the test, and my motorcycle broke down, or something like that, or the bus system.
But most of them showed up for the test.
And that was one advantage of having two classes.
If they got in late for the first test, I'd say, OK, come in and take the next test.
And it's a lot of work to write a test.
Did you ever have a parent or an important former student or politician ever try to intervene in a grade that you were giving to a student?
No.
Nobody ever asked you to reconsider?
I've not heard of that, but I've— Yeah.
No, the students usually pleaded their own case.
I had a Vietnamese who had to commute from Houston.
And I budged the limit a little bit to get him over a C level or something.
I think I had one black guy who I budged the limit to get him a C, and then he wanted to get a B. I threw him out of the office.
But I did meet the parent of one girl, and the black girls could get As.
The black boys, I don't know, C was their limit.
And her mother was a schoolteacher, as you might have expected, and she was happy that I was nice to her daughter and all that.
As far as you observed, how was racial integration, how did it go here?
Do you remember any problems that black students had in class or in the hallway or anything?
They just don't take physics.
Oh, okay.
I mean, can you imagine any of the football players signing up for physics?
Well, Bean was in my class one time, and I was telling the joke.
It's about potential energy.
If you have water up here, you know, and then let it down while you can get energy out of it.
And so I was trying to explain potential.
I said, it's like the Aggie football team.
I didn't know Bean was out there.
I said, every September, they're going to win the conference.
And a tremendous potential.
Afterwards, somebody said Bean was in the class.
He never came up or complained.
Let me tell about cowboy physics.
Oh, cowboy physics.
Yeah, well, it's for people who were...
What do they call it?
Math, there's a word for it.
Anyhow, they don't like mathematics, so you don't use any mathematics.
And you can do a lot of physics without mathematics.
And this is a freshman level physics?
No, that's it.
It's a 300 level.
So the ones who really know physics are in 100 level, and the ones who don't know much physics get a 300 level credit.
And this for non-majors?
For non-majors, yeah.
And usually the people who take it are majoring in education and or what else?
I don't know.
I haven't taught the course.
I've been invited in to give a talk, and so I don't know where they come from.
In general, most of the people that took the physics courses were majors in engineering and science.
Pre-med.
In fact, I remember asking one time, how many of you people are in this course because it's
And it's not a requirement.
I didn't get a single hand up.
I mean, it's very professionally oriented.
I don't know.
It's too bad, because physics is very interesting, and particularly astronomy and black holes and the Big Bang and all that.
you know, a good course can be made, and I think the cowboy physics was probably trying to do that.
All right.
In your normal routine, you had Monday, Wednesday, Friday courses, then you did your research on Tuesdays and Thursdays and in the afternoons?
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
How many graduate assistants normally did you have?
You mean in the research?
Mm-hmm.
Well, when I got into nuclear medicine,
I was kind of on my own because I didn't know what to do.
I invented a new type of what they call a positron tomograph.
And, but you can't have a graduate student helping you invent something.
So I got $200,000 to build one.
From what agency?
From American Cancer Society.
And, but then I needed people to screw things together and
until you get the thing built and can make some tests, then you can't really give any work to a graduate student that's worth his time.
Well, the first one we didn't work very well, so I had to build another one.
And so it wasn't until I guess about 1985 or so that I finally got some systems that would work.
And once you get some equipment that'll work, just like getting a cyclotron that's built, then you can bring in people to do research.
How long did it take you, with that gadget, how long did it take from the dream to the reality?
Well, let's see.
The first paper I published was 1980.
You know, I had a small unit in 1976.
I got out of the cyclotron about 1970, so the ideas ended up with a small unit in 1976.
And what did this machine do?
Well, it came out of the cyclotron.
We had an experiment.